Thereafter, rate residuals of disease or complications of medical treatment within the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system.
Note (2): Separately evaluate eye involvement occurring as a manifestation of Graves' Disease as diplopia (DC 6090); impairment of central visual acuity (DCs 6061-6066); or
Note (1): Evaluate symptoms of hyperthyroidism under DC 7900, hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease.
Note (1): Evaluate symptoms due to pressure on adjacent organs (such as the trachea, larynx, or esophagus) under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate
Note (2): If disfigurement of the neck is present due to thyroid disease or enlargement, separately evaluate under DC 7800 (burn scar(s) of the head, face, or neck; scar(s) of
Note (2): If disfigurement of the neck is present due to thyroid disease or enlargement, separately evaluate under DC 7800 (burn scar(s) of the head, face, or neck; scar(s) of
Note (1): This evaluation shall continue for six months beyond the date that an examining physician has determined crisis stabilization.
hypothyroidism shall be rated under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s) (e.g., eye, digestive, and mental disorders).
Note (2): This evaluation shall continue for six months after initial diagnosis.
Thereafter, rate residuals of disease or medical treatment under the most appropriate diagnostic
Note (3): If eye involvement, such as exophthalmos, corneal ulcer, blurred vision, or diplopia, is also present due to thyroid disease, also separately evaluate under the
Note (1): After six months, rate on residuals under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s) based on a VA examination.
Note (3): Where surgical intervention is not indicated, this evaluation shall continue for six months after pharmacologic treatment begins.
Note (4): Following surgery or other treatment, evaluate chronic residuals, such as nephrolithiasis (kidney stones), decreased renal function, fractures, vision problems, and
Note: Manifesting as hyperthyroidism, evaluate as hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease (DC 7900); manifesting as hypothyroidism, evaluate as
Note: The evaluations specifically indicated under this diagnostic code shall continue for six months following initial diagnosis.
Note: Thereafter, if diabetes insipidus has subsided, rate residuals under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system.
Note (3): Tuberculous Addison's disease will be evaluated as active or inactive tuberculosis.
Evaluate according to major manifestations to include, but not limited to, Type I diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, or Addison's
hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated
Note: Evaluate as malignant or benign neoplasm as appropriate.
Note: Evaluate as malignant or benign neoplasm as appropriate.
Note: Evaluate as malignant or benign neoplasm as appropriate.