[With the exceptions noted, disability from the following diseases and their residuals may be rated from 10 percent to 100 percent in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory,
Consider especially psychotic manifestations, complete or partial loss of use of one or more extremities, speech disturbances, impairment of vision,
neurological lesions, rate by comparison with the mild, moderate, severe, or complete paralysis of peripheral nerves]
Rate the vascular conditions under Codes 8007 through 8009, for 6 months 100
8013   Syphilis, cerebrospinal.
Note: Rate upon the severity of convulsions, paralysis, visual impairment or psychotic involvement, etc.
8019   Meningitis, cerebrospinal, epidemic:
Note: The rating in code 8021 will be continued for 2 years following cessation of surgical, chemotherapeutic or other treatment modality.
Note: The rating in code 8021 will be continued for 2 years following cessation of surgical, chemotherapeutic or other treatment modality.
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Rate residuals, minimum 10
Note: It is required for the minimum ratings for residuals under diagnostic codes 8000-8025, that there be ascertainable residuals.
prescribed minimum ratings are assigned, the diagnostic codes utilized as bases of evaluation be cited, in addition to the codes identifying the diagnoses.
There are three main areas of dysfunction that may result from TBI and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after TBI),
Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.
Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely
Evaluate cognitive impairment under the table titled “Evaluation of Cognitive
Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified.”
Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of TBI or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.
residuals of TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled “Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other
Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified.” However, separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such
as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the “Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other
of a mental disorder, evaluate emotional/behavioral symptoms under the criteria in the table titled “Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not
Evaluate physical (including neurological) dysfunction based on the following list, under an appropriate diagnostic code: Motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of
communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve
evaluate under the most appropriate diagnostic code.
evaluation, and combine under §4.25 the evaluations for each separately rated condition.
The evaluation assigned based on the “Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and
Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified” table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations
Consider the need for special monthly compensation for such problems as loss of use of an extremity, certain sensory impairments, erectile dysfunction, the need for aid and
Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Subjective Symptoms
The Consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than “total,” since
any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.
For example, assign a 70 percent evaluation if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet.
Note (1): There may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the table titled “Evaluation Of Cognitive Impairment And Other Residuals Of TBI Not
Otherwise Classified” with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another diagnostic code.
single evaluation under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.
Note (2): Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present in order to assign a particular
This classification does not affect the rating assigned under diagnostic code 8045.
Note (5): A veteran whose residuals of TBI are rated under a version of §4.124a, diagnostic code 8045, in effect before October 23, 2008 may request review under
VA will review that veteran's disability rating to determine whether the
veteran may be entitled to a higher disability rating under diagnostic code 8045.
A request for review pursuant to this note will be treated as a claim for an increased rating for
purposes of determining the effective date of an increased rating awarded as a result of such review; however, in no case will the award be effective before October 23, 2008.
For the purposes of determining the effective date of an increased rating awarded as a result of such review, VA will apply 38 CFR 3.114, if applicable.
Purely neurological disabilities, such as hemiplegia, cranial nerve paralysis, etc., due to cerebral arteriosclerosis will be rated under the diagnostic codes dealing with such
be rated 10 percent and no more under diagnostic code 9305.
Ratings in excess of 10 percent for cerebral arteriosclerosis under diagnostic code 9305 are not assignable in the absence of a diagnosis of multi-infarct
Note: The ratings under code 8046 apply only when the diagnosis of cerebral arteriosclerosis is substantiated by the entire clinical picture and not solely on findings of retinal
Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified
0No complaints of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions.
Objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in moderate functional
Objective evidence on testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in severe functional
For complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the
Moderately impaired judgment.
Moderately severely impaired judgment.
For even routine and familiar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives,
Severely impaired judgment.
1Occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation.
2Motor activity mildly decreased or with moderate slowing due to apraxia.
3Motor activity moderately decreased due to apraxia.
3Moderately severely impaired.
Gets lost even in familiar surroundings, unable to use assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system).
Severely impaired.
Subjective symptoms that do not interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships.
Three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships.
Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent
Three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close
Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: marked fatigability, blurred or double vision, headaches requiring
One or more neurobehavioral effects that do not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction.
1One or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.
2One or more neurobehavioral effects that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.
One or more neurobehavioral effects that interfere with or preclude workplace interaction, social interaction, or both on most days or that occasionally
1Comprehension or expression, or both, of either spoken language or written language is only occasionally impaired.
Inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time, or to comprehend
With very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability 50
Note: Depending upon frequency, severity, muscle groups involved.
Rate as tic; convulsive; severe cases 60
Rate as for epilepsy, petit mal.
Diseases of the Cranial Nerves
Disability from lesions of peripheral portions of first, second, third, fourth, sixth, and eighth nerves will be rated under the Organs of Special Sense.
Note: Dependent upon relative degree of sensory manifestation or motor loss.
Note: Tic douloureux may be rated in accordance with severity, up to complete paralysis.
Note : Dependent upon extent of sensory and motor loss to organs of voice, respiration, pharynx, stomach and heart.
Note: Dependent upon loss of motor function of sternomastoid and trapezius muscles.
Note: Dependent upon loss of motor function of tongue.
The term “incomplete paralysis,” with this and other peripheral nerve injuries, indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type picture for
complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.
The ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, combine with application of
Complete; all shoulder and elbow movements lost or severely affected, hand and wrist movements not affected 70 60
Complete; adduction, abduction and rotation of arm, flexion of elbow, and extension of wrist lost or severely affected 70 60
Complete; all intrinsic muscles of hand, and some or all of flexors of wrist and fingers, paralyzed (substantial loss of use of hand) 70 60
Note: Lesions involving only “dissociation of extensor communis digitorum” and “paralysis below the extensor communis digitorum,” will not exceed the moderate rating under
Complete; the hand inclined to the ulnar side, the index and middle fingers more extended than normally, considerable atrophy of the muscles of the thenar eminence,
Note: Not to be combined with lost motion above shoulder level.
Note: Combined nerve injuries should be rated by reference to the major involvement, or if sufficient in extent, consider radicular group ratings.
Complete; the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost 80
Complete; dorsal flexion of foot lost 30
Complete; plantar flexion lost, frank adduction of foot impossible, flexion and separation of toes abolished; no muscle in sole can move; in lesions of the nerve high in
Complete; paralysis of all muscles of sole of foot, frequently with painful paralysis of a causalgic nature; toes cannot be flexed; adduction is weakened; plantar flexion is
Severe to complete 10
Severe to complete 10
Severe to complete 10
Severe to complete 10
Note: The 100 percent rating will be continued for 6 months following the cessation of surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure.
Note (1): A major seizure is characterized by the generalized tonic-clonic convulsion with unconsciousness.
General Rating Formula for Major and Minor Epileptic Seizures:
Note (1): When continuous medication is shown necessary for the control of epilepsy, the minimum evaluation will be 10 percent.
other rating for epilepsy.
Note (2): In the presence of major and minor seizures, rate the predominating type.
Mental Disorders in Epilepsies: A nonpsychotic organic brain syndrome will be rated separately under the appropriate diagnostic code (e.g., 9304 or 9326).
with epilepsy will be rated separately.
The psychotic or psychroneurotic disorder will be rated under the appropriate diagnostic code.
The personality disorder will be rated as a
Epilepsy and Unemployability: (1) Rating specialists must bear in mind that the epileptic, although his or her seizures are controlled, may find employment and rehabilitation difficult
(4) Upon completion of this survey and current examination, the case should have rating board consideration.
1989; 55 FR 154, Jan. 3, 1990; 56 FR 51653, Oct. 15, 1991; 57 FR 24364, June 9, 1992; 70 FR 75399, Dec. 20, 2005; 73 FR 54705, Sept.