Ratings under diagnostic codes 7301 to 7329, inclusive, 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348 inclusive will not be combined with each other. A single evaluation will be assigned under the
diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation.
   Rating
7200   Mouth, injuries of.
Rate as for disfigurement and impairment of function of mastication.
7201   Lips, injuries of.
Rate as for disfigurement of face.
7202   Tongue, loss of whole or part:
With inability to communicate by speech 100
One-half or more 60
With marked speech impairment 30
7203   Esophagus, stricture of:
Permitting passage of liquids only, with marked impairment of general health 80
Severe, permitting liquids only 50
Moderate 30
7204   Esophagus, spasm of (cardiospasm).
If not amenable to dilation, rate as for the degree of obstruction (stricture).
7205   Esophagus, diverticulum of, acquired.
Rate as for obstruction (stricture).
7301   Peritoneum, adhesions of:
Severe; definite partial obstruction shown by X-ray, with frequent and prolonged episodes of severe colic distension, nausea or vomiting, following severe peritonitis, ruptured
appendix, perforated ulcer, or operation with drainage
50
Moderately severe; partial obstruction manifested by delayed motility of barium meal and less frequent and less prolonged episodes of pain 30
Moderate; pulling pain on attempting work or aggravated by movements of the body, or occasional episodes of colic pain, nausea, constipation (perhaps alternating with
diarrhea) or abdominal distension
10
Mild 0
Note: Ratings for adhesions will be considered when there is history of operative or other traumatic or infectious (intraabdominal) process, and at least two of the following:
disturbance of motility, actual partial obstruction, reflex disturbances, presence of pain.
7304   Ulcer, gastric.
7305   Ulcer, duodenal:
Severe; pain only partially relieved by standard ulcer therapy, periodic vomiting, recurrent hematemesis or melena, with manifestations of anemia and weight loss productive
of definite impairment of health
60
Moderately severe; less than severe but with impairment of health manifested by anemia and weight loss; or recurrent incapacitating episodes averaging 10 days or more in
duration at least four or more times a year
40
Moderate; recurring episodes of severe symptoms two or three times a year averaging 10 days in duration; or with continuous moderate manifestations 20
Mild; with recurring symptoms once or twice yearly 10
7306   Ulcer, marginal (gastrojejunal):
Pronounced; periodic or continuous pain unrelieved by standard ulcer therapy with periodic vomiting, recurring melena or hematemesis, and weight loss. Totally
incapacitating 100
Severe; same as pronounced with less pronounced and less continuous symptoms with definite impairment of health 60
Moderately severe; intercurrent episodes of abdominal pain at least once a month partially or completely relieved by ulcer therapy, mild and transient episodes of vomiting or
melena
40
Moderate; with episodes of recurring symptoms several times a year 20
Mild; with brief episodes of recurring symptoms once or twice yearly 10
7307   Gastritis, hypertrophic (identified by gastroscope):
Chronic; with severe hemorrhages, or large ulcerated or eroded areas 60
Chronic; with multiple small eroded or ulcerated areas, and symptoms 30
Chronic; with small nodular lesions, and symptoms 10
Gastritis, atrophic.
A complication of a number of diseases, including pernicious anemia.
Rate the underlying condition.
7308   Postgastrectomy syndromes:
Severe; associated with nausea, sweating, circulatory disturbance after meals, diarrhea, hypoglycemic symptoms, and weight loss with malnutrition and anemia 60
Moderate; less frequent episodes of epigastric disorders with characteristic mild circulatory symptoms after meals but with diarrhea and weight loss 40
Mild; infrequent episodes of epigastric distress with characteristic mild circulatory symptoms or continuous mild manifestations 20
7309   Stomach, stenosis of.
Rate as for gastric ulcer.
7310   Stomach, injury of, residuals.
Rate as peritoneal adhesions.
7311   Residuals of injury of the liver:
Depending on the specific residuals, separately evaluate as adhesions of peritoneum (diagnostic code 7301), cirrhosis of liver (diagnostic code 7312), and chronic liver
disease without cirrhosis (diagnostic code 7345).
7312   Cirrhosis of the liver, primary biliary cirrhosis, or cirrhotic phase of sclerosing cholangitis:
Generalized weakness, substantial weight loss, and persistent jaundice, or; with one of the following refractory to treatment: ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, hemorrhage
from varices or portal gastropathy (erosive gastritis)
100
History of two or more episodes of ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, or hemorrhage from varices or portal gastropathy (erosive gastritis), but with periods of remission
between attacks
70
History of one episode of ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, or hemorrhage from varices or portal gastropathy (erosive gastritis) 50
Portal hypertension and splenomegaly, with weakness, anorexia, abdominal pain, malaise, and at least minor weight loss 30
Symptoms such as weakness, anorexia, abdominal pain, and malaise 10
Note: For evaluation under diagnostic code 7312, documentation of cirrhosis (by biopsy or imaging) and abnormal liver function tests must be present.
7314   Cholecystitis, chronic:
Severe; frequent attacks of gall bladder colic 30
Moderate; gall bladder dyspepsia, confirmed by X-ray technique, and with infrequent attacks (not over two or three a year) of gall bladder colic, with or without jaundice 10
Mild 0
7315   Cholelithiasis, chronic.
Rate as for chronic cholecystitis.
7316   Cholangitis, chronic.
Rate as for chronic cholecystitis.
7317   Gall bladder, injury of.
Rate as for peritoneal adhesions.
7318   Gall bladder, removal of:
With severe symptoms 30
With mild symptoms 10
Nonsymptomatic 0
Spleen, disease or injury of.
   See Hemic and Lymphatic Systems.
7319   Irritable colon syndrome (spastic colitis, mucous colitis, etc.):
Severe; diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress 30
Moderate; frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress 10
Mild; disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress 0
7321   Amebiasis:
Mild gastrointestinal disturbances, lower abdominal cramps, nausea, gaseous distention, chronic constipation interrupted by diarrhea 10
Asymptomatic 0
Note: Amebiasis with or without liver abscess is parallel in symptomatology with ulcerative colitis and should be rated on the scale provided for the latter. Similarly, lung
abscess due to amebiasis will be rated under the respiratory system schedule, diagnostic code 6809.
7322   Dysentery, bacillary.
Rate as for ulcerative colitis.
7323   Colitis, ulcerative:
Pronounced; resulting in marked malnutrition, anemia, and general debility, or with serious complication as liver abscess 100
Severe; with numerous attacks a year and malnutrition, the health only fair during remissions 60
Moderately severe; with frequent exacerbations 30
Moderate; with infrequent exacerbations 10
7324   Distomiasis, intestinal or hepatic:
Severe symptoms 30
Moderate symptoms 10
Mild or no symptoms 0
7325   Enteritis, chronic.
Rate as for irritable colon syndrome.
7326   Enterocolitis, chronic.
Rate as for irritable colon syndrome.
7327   Diverticulitis.
Rate as for irritable colon syndrome, peritoneal adhesions, or colitis, ulcerative, depending upon the predominant disability picture.
7328   Intestine, small, resection of:
With marked interference with absorption and nutrition, manifested by severe impairment of health objectively supported by examination findings including material weight
loss
60
With definite interference with absorption and nutrition, manifested by impairment of health objectively supported by examination findings including definite weight loss 40
Symptomatic with diarrhea, anemia and inability to gain weight 20
Note: Where residual adhesions constitute the predominant disability, rate under diagnostic code 7301.
7329   Intestine, large, resection of:
With severe symptoms, objectively supported by examination findings 40
With moderate symptoms 20
With slight symptoms 10
Note: Where residual adhesions constitute the predominant disability, rate under diagnostic code 7301.
7330   Intestine, fistula of, persistent, or after attempt at operative closure:
Copious and frequent, fecal discharge 100
Constant or frequent, fecal discharge 60
Slight infrequent, fecal discharge 30
Healed; rate for peritoneal adhesions.
7331   Peritonitis, tuberculous, active or inactive:
Active 100
Inactive: See §§4.88b and 4.89.
7332   Rectum and anus, impairment of sphincter control:
Complete loss of sphincter control 100
Extensive leakage and fairly frequent involuntary bowel movements 60
Occasional involuntary bowel movements, necessitating wearing of pad 30
Constant slight, or occasional moderate leakage 10
Healed or slight, without leakage 0
7333   Rectum and anus, stricture of:
Requiring colostomy 100
Great reduction of lumen, or extensive leakage 50
Moderate reduction of lumen, or moderate constant leakage 30
7334   Rectum, prolapse of:
Severe (or complete), persistent 50
Moderate, persistent or frequently recurring 30
Mild with constant slight or occasional moderate leakage 10
7335   Ano, fistula in.
Rate as for impairment of sphincter control.
7336   Hemorrhoids, external or internal:
With persistent bleeding and with secondary anemia, or with fissures 20
Large or thrombotic, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences 10
Mild or moderate 0
7337   Pruritus ani.
Rate for the underlying condition.
7338   Hernia, inguinal:
Large, postoperative, recurrent, not well supported under ordinary conditions and not readily reducible, when considered inoperable 60
Small, postoperative recurrent, or unoperated irremediable, not well supported by truss, or not readily reducible 30
Postoperative recurrent, readily reducible and well supported by truss or belt 10
Not operated, but remediable 0
Small, reducible, or without true hernia protrusion 0
Note: Add 10 percent for bilateral involvement, provided the second hernia is compensable. This means that the more severely disabling hernia is to be evaluated, and 10
percent, only, added for the second hernia, if the latter is of compensable degree.
7339   Hernia, ventral, postoperative:
Massive, persistent, severe diastasis of recti muscles or extensive diffuse destruction or weakening of muscular and fascial support of abdominal wall so as to be inoperable 100
Large, not well supported by belt under ordinary conditions 40
Small, not well supported by belt under ordinary conditions, or healed ventral hernia or post-operative wounds with weakening of abdominal wall and indication for a
supporting belt
20
Wounds, postoperative, healed, no disability, belt not indicated 0
7340   Hernia, femoral.
Rate as for inguinal hernia.
7342   Visceroptosis, symptomatic, marked 10
7343   Malignant neoplasms of the digestive system, exclusive of skin growths 100
Note: A rating of 100 percent shall continue beyond the cessation of any surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure. Six months after
discontinuance of such treatment, the appropriate disability rating shall be determined by mandatory VA examination. Any change in evaluation based upon that or any
subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of §3.105(e) of this chapter. If there has been no local recurrence or metastasis, rate on residuals.
7344   Benign neoplasms, exclusive of skin growths:
Evaluate under an appropriate diagnostic code, depending on the predominant disability or the specific residuals after treatment.
7345   Chronic liver disease without cirrhosis (including hepatitis B, chronic active hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, hemochromatosis, drug-induced hepatitis, etc., but
excluding bile duct disorders and hepatitis C):
Near-constant debilitating symptoms (such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) 100
Daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with substantial weight loss (or other indication of malnutrition), and hepatomegaly, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as
fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12-month period, but not
occurring constantly
60
Daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with minor weight loss and hepatomegaly, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least four weeks, but less than six weeks, during the past 12-month period
40
Daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia (without weight loss or hepatomegaly), requiring dietary restriction or continuous medication, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms
such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least two weeks, but less than four weeks, during
the past 12-month period
20
Intermittent fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper
quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least one week, but less than two weeks, during the past 12-month period
10
Nonsymptomatic 0
Note (1): Evaluate sequelae, such as cirrhosis or malignancy of the liver, under an appropriate diagnostic code, but do not use the same signs and symptoms as the basis for
evaluation under DC 7354 and under a diagnostic code for sequelae. (See §4.14.).
Note (2): For purposes of evaluating conditions under diagnostic code 7345, “incapacitating episode” means a period of acute signs and symptoms severe enough to require
bed rest and treatment by a physician.
Note (3): Hepatitis B infection must be confirmed by serologic testing in order to evaluate it under diagnostic code 7345.
7346   Hernia hiatal:
Symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of
health
60
Persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable
impairment of health
30
With two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity 10
7347   Pancreatitis:
With frequently recurrent disabling attacks of abdominal pain with few pain free intermissions and with steatorrhea, malabsorption, diarrhea and severe malnutrition 100
With frequent attacks of abdominal pain, loss of normal body weight and other findings showing continuing pancreatic insufficiency between acute attacks 60
Moderately severe; with at least 4-7 typical attacks of abdominal pain per year with good remission between attacks 30
With at least one recurring attack of typical severe abdominal pain in the past year 10
Note 1: Abdominal pain in this condition must be confirmed as resulting from pancreatitis by appropriate laboratory and clinical studies.
Note 2: Following total or partial pancreatectomy, rate under above, symptoms, minimum rating 30 percent.
7348   Vagotomy with pyloroplasty or gastroenterostomy:
Followed by demonstrably confirmative postoperative complications of stricture or continuing gastric retention 40
With symptoms and confirmed diagnosis of alkaline gastritis, or of confirmed persisting diarrhea 30
Recurrent ulcer with incomplete vagotomy 20
Note: Rate recurrent ulcer following complete vagotomy under diagnostic code 7305, minimum rating 20 percent; and rate dumping syndrome under diagnostic code 7308.
7351   Liver transplant:
For an indefinite period from the date of hospital admission for transplant surgery 100
Minimum 30
Note: A rating of 100 percent shall be assigned as of the date of hospital admission for transplant surgery and shall continue. One year following discharge, the appropriate
disability rating shall be determined by mandatory VA examination. Any change in evaluation based upon that or any subsequent examination shall be subject to the
provisions of §3.105(e) of this chapter.
7354   Hepatitis C (or non-A, non-B hepatitis):
With serologic evidence of hepatitis C infection and the following signs and symptoms due to hepatitis C infection:
   Near-constant debilitating symptoms (such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) 100
Daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with substantial weight loss (or other indication of malnutrition), and hepatomegaly, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as
fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12-month period, but not
occurring constantly
60
Daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with minor weight loss and hepatomegaly, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least four weeks, but less than six weeks, during the past 12-month period
40
Daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia (without weight loss or hepatomegaly), requiring dietary restriction or continuous medication, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms
such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least two weeks, but less than four weeks, during
the past 12-month period
20
Intermittent fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper
quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least one week, but less than two weeks, during the past 12-month period
10
Nonsymptomatic 0
Note (1): Evaluate sequelae, such as cirrhosis or malignancy of the liver, under an appropriate diagnostic code, but do not use the same signs and symptoms as the basis for
evaluation under DC 7354 and under a diagnostic code for sequelae. (See §4.14.).
Note (2): For purposes of evaluating conditions under diagnostic code 7354, “incapacitating episode” means a period of acute signs and symptoms severe enough to require
bed rest and treatment by a physician.
(Authority: 38 U.S.C. 1155)
[29 FR 6718, May 22, 1964, as amended at 34 FR 5063, Mar. 11, 1969; 40 FR 42540, Sept. 15, 1975; 41 FR 11301, Mar. 18, 1976; 66 FR 29488, May 31, 2001]
The Genitourinary System
