   Rating
7900   Hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease:
For six months after initial diagnosis 30
Thereafter, rate residuals of disease or complications of medical treatment within the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system.
Note (1): If hyperthyroid cardiovascular or cardiac disease is present, separately evaluate under DC 7008 (hyperthyroid heart disease).
Note (2): Separately evaluate eye involvement occurring as a manifestation of Graves' Disease as diplopia (DC 6090); impairment of central visual acuity (DCs 6061-6066); or
under the most appropriate DCs in §4.79.
7901   Thyroid enlargement, toxic:
Note (1): Evaluate symptoms of hyperthyroidism under DC 7900, hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease.
Note (2): If disfigurement of the neck is present due to thyroid disease or enlargement, separately evaluate under DC 7800 (burn scar(s) of the head, face, or neck; scar(s) of
the head, face, or neck due to other causes; or other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck).
7902   Thyroid enlargement, nontoxic:
Note (1): Evaluate symptoms due to pressure on adjacent organs (such as the trachea, larynx, or esophagus) under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate
body system.
Note (2): If disfigurement of the neck is present due to thyroid disease or enlargement, separately evaluate under DC 7800 (burn scar(s) of the head, face, or neck; scar(s) of
the head, face, or neck due to other causes; or other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck).
7903   Hypothyroidism:
Hypothyroidism manifesting as myxedema (cold intolerance, muscular weakness, cardiovascular involvement (including, but not limited to hypotension, bradycardia, and
pericardial effusion), and mental disturbance (including, but not limited to dementia, slowing of thought and depression))
100
Note (1): This evaluation shall continue for six months beyond the date that an examining physician has determined crisis stabilization. Thereafter, the residual effects of
hypothyroidism shall be rated under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s) (e.g., eye, digestive, and mental disorders).
Hypothyroidism without myxedema 30
Note (2): This evaluation shall continue for six months after initial diagnosis. Thereafter, rate residuals of disease or medical treatment under the most appropriate diagnostic
code(s) under the appropriate body system (e.g., eye, digestive, mental disorders).
Note (3): If eye involvement, such as exophthalmos, corneal ulcer, blurred vision, or diplopia, is also present due to thyroid disease, also separately evaluate under the
appropriate diagnostic code(s) in §4.79, Schedule of Ratings—Eye (such as diplopia (DC 6090) or impairment of central visual acuity (DCs 6061-6066)).
7904   Hyperparathyroidism:
For six months from date of discharge following surgery 100
Note (1): After six months, rate on residuals under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s) based on a VA examination.
Hypercalcemia (indicated by at least one of the following: Total Ca greater than 12 mg/dL (3-3.5 mmol/L), Ionized Ca greater than 5.6 mg/dL (2-2.5 mmol/L), creatinine
clearance less than 60 mL/min, bone mineral density T-score less than 2.5 SD (below mean) at any site or previous fragility fracture)
60
Note (2): Where surgical intervention is indicated, this evaluation shall continue until the day of surgery, at which time the provisions pertaining to a 100-percent evaluation
shall apply.
Note (3): Where surgical intervention is not indicated, this evaluation shall continue for six months after pharmacologic treatment begins. After six months, rate on residuals
under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s) based on a VA examination.
Symptoms such as fatigue, anorexia, nausea, or constipation that occur despite surgery; or in individuals who are not candidates for surgery but require continuous
medication for control
10
Asymptomatic 0
Note (4): Following surgery or other treatment, evaluate chronic residuals, such as nephrolithiasis (kidney stones), decreased renal function, fractures, vision problems, and
cardiovascular complications, under the appropriate diagnostic codes.
7905   Hypoparathyroidism:
For three months after initial diagnosis 100
Thereafter, evaluate chronic residuals, such as nephrolithiasis (kidney stones), cataracts, decreased renal function, and congestive heart failure under the appropriate
diagnostic codes.
7906   Thyroiditis:
With normal thyroid function (euthyroid) 0
Note: Manifesting as hyperthyroidism, evaluate as hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease (DC 7900); manifesting as hypothyroidism, evaluate as
hypothyroidism (DC 7903).
7907   Cushing's syndrome:
As active, progressive disease, including areas of osteoporosis, hypertension, and proximal upper and lower extremity muscle wasting that results in inability to rise from
squatting position, climb stairs, rise from a deep chair without assistance, or raise arms
100
Proximal upper or lower extremity muscle wasting that results in inability to rise from squatting position, climb stairs, rise from a deep chair without assistance, or raise arms 60
With striae, obesity, moon face, glucose intolerance, and vascular fragility 30
Note: The evaluations specifically indicated under this diagnostic code shall continue for six months following initial diagnosis. After six months, rate on residuals under the
appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s).
7908   Acromegaly:
Evidence of increased intracranial pressure (such as visual field defect), arthropathy, glucose intolerance, and either hypertension or cardiomegaly 100
Arthropathy, glucose intolerance, and hypertension 60
Enlargement of acral parts or overgrowth of long bones 30
7909   Diabetes insipidus:
For three months after initial diagnosis 30
Note: Thereafter, if diabetes insipidus has subsided, rate residuals under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system.
With persistent polyuria or requiring continuous hormonal therapy 10
7911   Addison's disease (adrenocortical insufficiency):
Four or more crises during the past year 60
Three crises during the past year, or; five or more episodes during the past year 40
One or two crises during the past year, or; two to four episodes during the past year, or; weakness and fatigability, or; corticosteroid therapy required for control 20
Note (1): An Addisonian “crisis” consists of the rapid onset of peripheral vascular collapse (with acute hypotension and shock), with findings that may include: anorexia;
nausea; vomiting; dehydration; profound weakness; pain in abdomen, legs, and back; fever; apathy, and depressed mentation with possible progression to coma, renal
shutdown, and death.
Note (2): An Addisonian “episode,” for VA purposes, is a less acute and less severe event than an Addisonian crisis and may consist of anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
dehydration, weakness, malaise, orthostatic hypotension, or hypoglycemia, but no peripheral vascular collapse.
Note (3): Tuberculous Addison's disease will be evaluated as active or inactive tuberculosis. If inactive, these evaluations are not to be combined with the graduated ratings
of 50 percent or 30 percent for non-pulmonary tuberculosis specified under §4.88b. Assign the higher rating.
7912   Polyglandular syndrome (multiple endocrine neoplasia, autoimmune polyglandular syndrome):
Evaluate according to major manifestations to include, but not limited to, Type I diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, or Addison's
disease.
7913   Diabetes mellitus:
Requiring more than one daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities) with episodes of
ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and
strength or complications that would be compensable if separately evaluated
100
Requiring one or more daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two
hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated
60
Requiring one or more daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities 40
Requiring one or more daily injection of insulin and restricted diet, or; oral hypoglycemic agent and restricted diet 20
Manageable by restricted diet only 10
Note (1): Evaluate compensable complications of diabetes separately unless they are part of the criteria used to support a 100-percent evaluation. Noncompensable
complications are considered part of the diabetic process under DC 7913.
Note (2): When diabetes mellitus has been conclusively diagnosed, do not request a glucose tolerance test solely for rating purposes.
7914   Neoplasm, malignant, any specified part of the endocrine system 100
Note: A rating of 100 percent shall continue beyond the cessation of any surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure. Six months after
discontinuance of such treatment, the appropriate disability rating shall be determined by mandatory VA examination. Any change in evaluation based upon that or any
subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of §3.105(e) of this chapter. If there has been no local recurrence or metastasis, rate on residuals.
7915   Neoplasm, benign, any specified part of the endocrine system:
Rate as residuals of endocrine dysfunction.
7916   Hyperpituitarism (prolactin secreting pituitary dysfunction):
Note: Evaluate as malignant or benign neoplasm, as appropriate.
7917   Hyperaldosteronism (benign or malignant):
Note: Evaluate as malignant or benign neoplasm, as appropriate.
7918   Pheochromocytoma (benign or malignant):
Note: Evaluate as malignant or benign neoplasm as appropriate.
7919   C-cell hyperplasia of the thyroid:
If antineoplastic therapy is required, evaluate as a malignant neoplasm under DC 7914. If a prophylactic thyroidectomy is performed (based upon genetic testing) and
antineoplastic therapy is not required, evaluate as hypothyroidism under DC 7903.
[61 FR 20446, May 7, 1996, as amended at 82 FR 50804, Nov. 2, 2017]
Neurological Conditions and Convulsive Disorders
