nutritional deficiencies.
Note: Rate any residual disability of infection within the appropriate body system as indicated by the notes in the evaluation criteria. As applicable, consider the long-term health
effects potentially associated with infectious diseases as listed in §3.317(d) of this chapter, specifically Brucellosis, Campylobacter jejuni, Coxiella burnetii (Q fever), Malaria,
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis, Nontyphoid Salmonella, Shigella, Visceral Leishmaniasis, and West Nile virus.
   Rating
General Rating Formula for Infectious Diseases:
For active disease 100
After active disease has resolved, rate at 0 percent for infection. Rate any residual disability of infection within the appropriate body system.
6300   Vibriosis (Cholera, Non-cholera):
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate residuals of cholera and non-cholera vibrio infections, such as renal failure, skin, and musculoskeletal conditions, within the appropriate body system.
6301   Visceral leishmaniasis:
As active disease 100
Note 1: Continue a 100 percent evaluation beyond the cessation of treatment for active disease. Six months after discontinuance of such treatment, determine the
appropriate disability rating by mandatory VA examination. Any change in evaluation based upon that or any subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of
§3.105(e) of this chapter. Thereafter, rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to liver damage and bone
marrow disease.
Note 2: Confirm the recurrence of active infection by culture, histopathology, or other diagnostic laboratory testing.
6302   Leprosy (Hansen's disease):
As active disease 100
Note: Continue a 100 percent evaluation beyond the cessation of treatment for active disease. Six months after discontinuance of such treatment, determine the appropriate
disability rating by mandatory VA examination. Any change in evaluation based upon that or any subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of §3.105(e) of
this chapter. Thereafter, rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, skin lesions, peripheral neuropathy, or
amputations.
6304   Malaria:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note 1: The diagnosis of malaria, both initially and during relapse, depends on the identification of the malarial parasites in blood smears or other specific diagnostic
laboratory tests such as antigen detection, immunologic (immunochromatographic) tests, and molecular testing such as polymerase chain reaction tests.
Note 2: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, liver or splenic damage, and central nervous system
conditions.
6305   Lymphatic filariasis, to include elephantiasis:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, epididymitis, lymphangitis, lymphatic obstruction, or
lymphedema affecting extremities, genitals, and/or breasts.
6306   Bartonellosis:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, endocarditis or skin lesions.
6307   Plague:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection.
6308   Relapsing Fever:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, liver or spleen damage, iritis, uveitis, or central nervous
system involvement.
6309   Rheumatic fever:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, heart damage.
6310   Syphilis, and other treponema infections:
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, diseases of the nervous system, vascular system,
eyes, or ears (see DC 7004, DC 8013, DC 8014, DC 8015, and DC 9301).
6311   Tuberculosis, miliary:
As active disease 100
Inactive disease: See §§4.88c and 4.89.
Note 1: Confirm the recurrence of active infection by culture, histopathology, or other diagnostic laboratory testing.
Note 2: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection which includes, but is not limited to, skin conditions and conditions of the respiratory,
central nervous, musculoskeletal, ocular, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary systems and those residuals listed in §4.88c.
6312   Nontuberculosis mycobacterium infection:
As active disease 100
Note 1: Continue the rating of 100 percent for the duration of treatment for active disease followed by a mandatory VA exam. If there is no relapse, rate on residuals. Any
change in evaluation based upon that or any subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of §3.105(e) of this chapter.
Note 2: Confirm the recurrence of active infection by culture, histopathology, or other diagnostic laboratory testing.
Note 3: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection which includes, but is not limited to, skin conditions and conditions of the respiratory,
central nervous, musculoskeletal, ocular, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary systems and those residuals listed in §4.88c.
6313   Avitaminosis:
Marked mental changes, moist dermatitis, inability to retain adequate nourishment, exhaustion, and cachexia 100
With all of the symptoms listed below, plus mental symptoms and impaired bodily vigor 60
With stomatitis, diarrhea, and symmetrical dermatitis 40
With stomatitis, or achlorhydria, or diarrhea 20
Confirmed diagnosis with nonspecific symptoms such as: decreased appetite, weight loss, abdominal discomfort, weakness, inability to concentrate and irritability 10
6314   Beriberi:
As active disease:
With congestive heart failure, anasarca, or Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 100
With cardiomegaly, or; with peripheral neuropathy with footdrop or atrophy of thigh or calf muscles 60
With peripheral neuropathy with absent knee or ankle jerks and loss of sensation, or; with symptoms such as weakness, fatigue, anorexia, dizziness, heaviness and stiffness
of legs, headache or sleep disturbance
30
Thereafter rate residuals under the appropriate body system.
6315   Pellagra:
Marked mental changes, moist dermatitis, inability to retain adequate nourishment, exhaustion, and cachexia 100
With all of the symptoms listed below, plus mental symptoms and impaired bodily vigor 60
With stomatitis, diarrhea, and symmetrical dermatitis 40
With stomatitis, or achlorhydria, or diarrhea 20
Confirmed diagnosis with nonspecific symptoms such as: decreased appetite, weight loss, abdominal discomfort, weakness, inability to concentrate and irritability 10
6316   Brucellosis:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note 1: Culture, serologic testing, or both must confirm the initial diagnosis and recurrence of active infection.
Note 2: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, meningitis, liver, spleen and musculoskeletal
conditions.
6317   Rickettsial, ehrlichia, and anaplasma infections:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note 1: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, bone marrow, spleen, central nervous system, and
skin conditions.
Note 2: This diagnostic code includes, but is not limited to, scrub typhus, Rickettsial pox, African tick-borne fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, or
anaplasmosis.
6318   Melioidosis:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note 1: Confirm by culture or other specific diagnostic laboratory tests the initial diagnosis and any relapse or chronic activity of infection.
Note 2: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, arthritis, lung lesions, or meningitis.
6319   Lyme disease:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, arthritis, Bell's palsy, radiculopathy, ocular, or cognitive
dysfunction.
6320   Parasitic diseases otherwise not specified:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection.
6325   Hyperinfection syndrome or disseminated strongyloidiasis:
As active disease 100
Note: Continue the rating of 100 percent through active disease followed by a mandatory VA exam. If there is no relapse, rate on residual disability. Any change in evaluation
based upon that or any subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of §3.105(e) of this chapter.
6326   Schistosomiasis:
As acute or asymptomatic chronic disease 0
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, conditions of the liver, intestinal system, female genital
tract, genitourinary tract, or central nervous system.
6329   Hemorrhagic fevers, including dengue, yellow fever, and others:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, conditions of the central nervous system, liver, or
kidney.
6330   Campylobacter jejuni infection:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, Guillain-Barre syndrome, reactive arthritis, or uveitis.
6331   Coxiella burnetii infection (Q fever):
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, chronic hepatitis, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, post Q-
fever chronic fatigue syndrome, or vascular infections.
6333   Nontyphoid salmonella infections:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, reactive arthritis.
6334   Shigella infections:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, hemolytic-uremic syndrome or reactive arthritis.
6335   West Nile virus infection:
Evaluate under the General Rating Formula.
Note: Rate under the appropriate body system any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, variable physical, functional, or cognitive disabilities.
6350   Lupus erythematosus, systemic (disseminated):
Not to be combined with ratings under DC 7809 Acute, with frequent exacerbations, producing severe impairment of health 100
Exacerbations lasting a week or more, 2 or 3 times per year 60
Exacerbations once or twice a year or symptomatic during the past 2 years 10
Note: Evaluate this condition either by combining the evaluations for residuals under the appropriate system, or by evaluating DC 6350, whichever method results in a higher
evaluation.
6351   HIV-related illness:
AIDS with recurrent opportunistic infections (see Note 3) or with secondary diseases afflicting multiple body systems; HIV-related illness with debility and progressive weight
loss
100
Refractory constitutional symptoms, diarrhea, and pathological weight loss; or minimum rating following development of AIDS-related opportunistic infection or neoplasm 60
Recurrent constitutional symptoms, intermittent diarrhea, and use of approved medication(s); or minimum rating with T4 cell count less than 200 30
Following development of HIV-related constitutional symptoms; T4 cell count between 200 and 500; use of approved medication(s); or with evidence of depression or
memory loss with employment limitations
10
Asymptomatic, following initial diagnosis of HIV infection, with or without lymphadenopathy or decreased T4 cell count 0
Note 1: In addition to standard therapies and regimens, the term “approved medication(s)” includes treatment regimens and medications prescribed as part of a research
protocol at an accredited medical institution.
Note 2: Diagnosed psychiatric illness, central nervous system manifestations, opportunistic infections, and neoplasms may be rated separately under the appropriate
diagnostic codes if a higher overall evaluation results, provided the disability symptoms do not overlap with evaluations otherwise assignable above.
Note 3: The following list of opportunistic infections are considered AIDS-defining conditions, that is, a diagnosis of AIDS follows if a person has HIV and one more of these
infections, regardless of the CD4 count—candidiasis of the bronchi, trachea, esophagus, or lungs; invasive cervical cancer; coccidioidomycosis; cryptococcosis;
cryptosporidiosis; cytomegalovirus (particularly CMV retinitis); HIV-related encephalopathy; herpes simplex-chronic ulcers for greater than one month, or bronchitis,
pneumonia, or esophagitis; histoplasmosis; isosporiasis (chronic intestinal); Kaposi's sarcoma; lymphoma; mycobacterium avium complex; tuberculosis; pneumocystis
jirovecii (carinii) pneumonia; pneumonia, recurrent; progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; salmonella septicemia, recurrent; toxoplasmosis of the brain; and wasting
syndrome due to HIV.
6354   Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS):
Debilitating fatigue, cognitive impairments (such as inability to concentrate, forgetfulness, or confusion), or a combination of other signs and symptoms:
Which are nearly constant and so severe as to restrict routine daily activities almost completely and which may occasionally preclude self-care 100
Which are nearly constant and restrict routine daily activities to less than 50 percent of the pre-illness level; or which wax and wane, resulting in periods of incapacitation of
at least six weeks total duration per year
60
Which are nearly constant and restrict routine daily activities from 50 to 75 percent of the pre-illness level; or which wax and wane, resulting in periods of incapacitation of at
least four but less than six weeks total duration per year
40
Which are nearly constant and restrict routine daily activities by less than 25 percent of the pre-illness level; or which wax and wane, resulting in periods of incapacitation of
at least two but less than four weeks total duration per year
20
Which wax and wane but result in periods of incapacitation of at least one but less than two weeks total duration per year; or symptoms controlled by continuous medication 10
Note: For the purpose of evaluating this disability, incapacitation exists only when a licensed physician prescribes bed rest and treatment.
[61 FR 39875, July 31, 1996, as amended at 84 FR 28230, June 18, 2019]
